In this video, we'll go
over using nested loops.
Just like we nested if statements
one inside the other, the same
technique can be used to nest loops.
We can nest loops as many
levels deep as we need.
I'll be using just 2 levels in
the examples I'll show you that
is one loop inside another.
Nested loops have many uses, but
they're especially useful for
multi-dimensional structures, like
2D 3D arrays and 2D and 3D vectors.
When we talk about nested loops,
it's common to refer to the loops as
the outer loop and the inner loop.
Let's see some examples.
Here's a pretty generic
example of a nested loop.
In this case, we have a for loop
with another for loop within it.
The outer loop is incrementing
outer valve from 1 to 2 by 1.
The inner loop is incrementing
inner vowel from 1 to 3 by 1.
Notice the output.
The integer to the left of
the comma is the outer val.
And the integer to the right
of the comma is the inner val.
Notice how inner val increments from
1 to 3 while outer val remains at 1.
Then outer val increments to
2, and we do it all over again.
You can think of this as the outer
loop iterating 2 times and each time
the inner loop iterates 3 times.
That's why we say that the inner loop
loops faster than the outer loop.
Let's see another example.
In this example, we can take advantage
of a nested loop to display the
multiplication table from 1 to 10.
A nested loop is perfect
since we want 1 x 1, 1 x 2,
1 x 3, all the way to 1 x 10.
Then we want to do 2 x
1, 2 x 2 and so forth.
So we want an outer loop iterating
from 1 to 10 and an inner loop
also iterating from 1 to 10.
And the body of the inner loop
simply multiplies the outer loops
variables x the inner loops variable.
Notice the output statement
after the inner loop that
displays a line of dashes.
This executes each time
the inner loop completes.
We'll execute this loop in the IDE
in a minute so you can see it work.
Let's see an example of a
nested loop using a 2D array.
In this example, we have
a 2-dimensional array
of integers named grid.
Grid has 5 rows and 3 columns.
Suppose we want to assign 1000
to each element in the grid.
We can do this easily
with nested for loops.
The outer loop iterates for
rows 0 to 4 inclusive, and the
inner loop iterates the columns
for each from 1 to 2 inclusive.
Then in the body of the
loop we simply assign 1000
to grid sub-row sub-column.
Notice I'm using block statements
for the body of these loops.
I didn't have to here, but it's
good practice to do so since it
makes adding code later much easier.
Now that we've initialized the grid
values to a 1000, we can use a similar
nested loop to display the values.
In this example, we're assuming
that grid has been initialized
as in the previous slide.
At each iteration of the inner,
loop we display the element at grid
sub-row, sub-column followed by space.
So we're displaying these
elements across the screen.
When we complete the inner loop,
we print a new line and then
execute the outer loop again.
You can see the pattern is the
same as with initialization.
This is a very common
pattern for working with
multi-dimensional structures.
Let's see how we can use
nested loops with vectors.
In this final example, we declare
a vector of vector of integer.
So we have a vector whose elements
are vectors of integers, very
similar to a 2D array of integers
with the advantage of vectors.
With a vector of vectors, we
can allow each vector within the
vector 2D to be of different size.
In this case, we have
3 vectors of vectors.
And each of those vectors
is a vector of integers.
I know it sounds complicated.
But if you look at the example,
it should be pretty clear.
The first vector has
3 integers: 1 2 3.
The second vector has 4
integers: 10 20 30 40.
The third vector has 5 integers:
100 200 300 400 and 500.
If we wanted to display the contents
of vector 2D, we could do it easily
with nested range-based for loops.
And if we use the auto keyword
to allow the compiler to deduce
the type of each loop element,
it makes it dead simple.
Notice the outer loop in this
case, the compiler deduces vect
to be a vector of integers.
And in the inner loop, it
reduces val to be an integer.
In the body of the inner
loop, we simply display the
value followed by a space.
As we did in the previous example, we
display a new line after we're done
displaying the inner vector values.
You can see how little code
and how simple the code is.
You can see the output from this
loop at the right on the screen.
In these examples I've used 4 loops
within 4 loops, but you can use any
combination of loops within any other
loop to achieve your desired behavior.
Let's head over to CodeLite and
see some of these examples live.
Okay, so I'm in the CodeLite IDE.
I mean it's still in the section
9 workspace, and I'm in the
multiplication table project.
This is the piece of code that
executes and displays a multiplication
table for up to 10 x 10.
So let's go over this really
carefully because this is a
classic example of a nested loop.
Notice we've got the 2 for
loops, 1 within the other.
And the outer loop is
looping on the num1 variable.
The inner loop is looping
on the num2 variable.
So we're going to
start the outer loop.
And we're going to assign right here
we're going to initialize num1 to 1.
And now we check is num1 less
than or equal to 10, it is.
So we go into the body of the loop.
Well, the body of this
loop is another loop.
And in this case, we're
initializing num2 to 1 right here.
And we check is num2 less
than or equal to 10, it is.
So we execute the body of
the inner loop, which is this
output statement right here.
So what we do here is we
display num1, which is 1.
We display the *, string right there.
We display num2 which is 1.
We display that equal sign right here.
And then we multiply num1
num2, that gives us 1.
And we display that value.
That's it.
We display a new line,
and now we loop again.
So we come back up to the loop.
We do the increment.
So now num2 is 2.
We check is num2 less than
or equal to 10, it is.
Execute the body of the loop again.
This time through we've got
num1 is still 1 right here.
Num2 is now 2, and we display
the output and so forth.
So we're going to do this until
we get to 1 x 10 equals 10.
And num1 will still be 1.
At this point, num2 is 10.
Now we're going to
increment num2 to 11.
We come over here, and we
check is num2 less than
or equal to 10, it's not.
So we fail.
Now we terminate the inner loop.
We execute this statement right
here so it's going to display
a bunch of dashed lines here.
And then remember, we're
still inside the outer loops.
We have to go back out to the
outer loop and do the increment.
So now num1 becomes 2, is 2
less than or equal to 10, yes.
We go back into the inner loop again.
So think of this as here's your
outer loop, and it's looping.
And each time it loops, you're
going to do the inner loop 10 times.
Then you're going to go back out,
outer loop, and you're going to
do the inner loop again 10 times.
Okay, my art is not pretty, but
hopefully, you will understand
what I'm talking about. All right, so
that's what's really going on here.
Let me clear this and run it
so you can see this in action.
So there's the output.
Let me scroll up.
So you can see here 1 x 1 is
1, 1 x 2 is 2 and so forth.
Notice in this case, let me
move this just over here so
you can see the variables.
Over here, this left 1 is num1.
And then you can see that
num2 is looping faster.
That's why we say the inner loop
loops faster than the outer loop.
We go through all 10 of them, then
we display the dashed line, and then
we go back out to the outer loop.
Now num1 is 2 and then 3 and
then all the way to the bottom
where we end up with the 10s.
And we end up with 10 x 10.
At this point, the outer loop fails.
And we're done.
Okay, so hopefully that makes sense.
And what we'll do next is
we'll do an example that's a
little bit more complicated.
We'll actually grab some user
input, we'll grab some numbers
put them in a vector and display a
histogram based on those numbers.
Okay, so I'll close this, and I
will open up the histogram project.
I'll double click on that to
make it the active project.
Right now there's not much in here.
It's just a really, really
simple basic main that does
nothing just prints a new line.
So what do we want to do here.
We want to ask the user how
many data items they have.
Let's say they type 6.
Then we ask them for each one of those
data items, which is just an integer.
And then when we're finished
with that, we'll output all that
information using a histogram.
So that's pretty straightforward.
We need to ask the user
how many items they've got.
So let's create an integer
variable there, called num items.
And we'll just initialize that to 0.
And then we'll ask them
how many items do you have.
Let's say data items.
Okay, and we'll read that
integer into num items.
So now we know how many
data items they have.
What we want to do next
is loop that many times.
So if I've got 5 data items,
well, I want you to ask me 5
times to enter those that data.
So it's really makes sense to use a
for loop here because we know exactly
how many times we want to iterate.
We also need to store this
information somewhere, right.
So all that information they type
in, we'd like to store it somewhere.
Since we really don't know what number
they're going to type in, an array
would not be a good idea here because
you don't know how big to make it.
You'd have to make it really big just
to be sure that everything will fit.
So we'll use a vector.
First thing we'll do is
we'll include vector here.
So we're good to go there.
And let's declare
the vector right now.
We'll call it vector of
integers in this case.
And let's just call the data
because that's what it is.
And we'll initialize
the vector it's empty.
All right, remember, a vector
is a dynamic data structure so
we'll be able to read data from
the user and put it into that
vector using its pushback method.
So let's loop.
How many times are we going to loop?
We're going to loop from 1 to
that number they enter, right.
So if they enter 10.
We're going to go from 1 to 10.
And we're going to grab 10 data items.
So let's do that right now.
4 int I, we'll use I and we'll
initialize I to 1 because
we want to start here at 1.
and I want to loop while I
is less than or equal to the
number of items that they
want to enter into the vector.
And I will increment I by 1 each time.
Now I'm going to use a
block statement here.
Now what do you think
is going on in here.
Well, I need to ask them
for the data, right.
I'm going to loop let's
say I typed in 10 items.
This is going to loop 10 times.
So we need somewhere to read
the data into that sounds
like an integer to me.
So we'll say data item.
We'll initialize that to 0.
And then we'll just say cout you
know enter data item and we may
as well tell them which 1 it is
because we know it right it's I.
We do something like that.
We'll put a colon so
it looks nice for them.
So this will say enter data
item 1, enter data item 2.
All the way up to whatever
they decided they wanted.
What we'll do now is we'll read that
integer that they type in into that
data item variable we just created.
So we've got the data.
What do we do.
We need to put it
into that vector now.
Remember, how to do that.
The vector's name is data.
So we say data.pushback, and we
push that data item in there.
So it's going to put the data
item in the back of the vector.
That's it.
That's pretty straightforward.
So at this point, now what we've
got is a vector that contains
whatever data they typed in.
So if they typed in 5 integers,
that vector has 5 integers in there.
So what do we want to do now, well,
we want to display the histogram.
But before we do that, let's
just display the data and
make sure we have it, right.
It's always good to test as you go.
So let's do that.
We'll say 4, we'll use a range-based
for loop here, auto val, that's the
value, and the collection is data.
Okay, so for each element in
that data collection, let's
just output it now just to test.
Okay, that's it.
Let's run this.
How many data items do you have.
Well, I have 5 data items.
Enter data item 1 10 to 20.
Let's just put them in 10s that way
we know what we're getting 30 40,
it should ask me 1 more time 50.
Now it should be done.
And I'm displaying the data items.
So everything's looking good.
Let's run it again with 3 data items.
Let's put a 1000 in here, let's put a
10 in there, let's put a 1200 in here.
1000, 10, 1200.
Perfect. So that's exactly what's
going on right now is
right where we want to be.
How many items do you have, and enter
data for each one of those values.
Good.
So it's always a good idea to test
as you go because it just makes life
much, much easier to test as you
go rather than trying to test this
big monolithic thing at the end.
All right, so let me just do
a quick statement here and
I'll put a new line in the end
just to give a little space.
I'm just going to say
displaying histogram.
Now what we need to do is pretty
much what we did here right except
we don't want to display the
value, we want to display a dash
for each one of those values.
So for example if the value is
10, we want to display 10 dashes.
If the value is 100,
we'll display 100 dashes.
That's what a histogram looks like.
So how do I do that.
Well, I need to have
another loop in here.
And I'm just going to
get rid of that right.
Now so we still have this
loop right here, it's looping
through the collection.
So how what do I do here.
Well, I know how many times
I need to loop, right.
I need to loop val time.
So a for loop is good.
We can use any loop we want really.
But let's use a for loop
because it's really simple.
So we're going to say for
int and let's use I again.
And we're going to start at 1,
and we're going to loop while
I is less than or equal to val.
That's the number we just read.
Okay, now what.
Well, the increment is by 1,
we need to increment by 1.
So that's my inner loop.
What do I want to do in here.
All I want to do is just type a dash.
And we'll use dashes for a reason.
You could use an asterisk, but I'm
going to use an asterisk in a second.
That's it.
So if the... let me fix that typo... if the user typed in 5
integers and the first 1 is 6
then val is going to be 6.
And we're going to loop 6
times displaying 6 dashes.
If the next one is 12, we're
going to display 12 dashes.
After we're done displaying those
dashes, we need to display a new line.
Otherwise, everything's just going
to go right across the screen.
So I'm just going to
say end line right here.
And we need to close off this -- let's
do that for loop right here on a
block as well since we're probably
going to add a little bit more code.
Okay, so that's where we're at now.
You can see pretty straightforward.
Let's run this.
And I forgot a semicolon right
there so I put that in there.
Okay, how many items do you have.
Let's just start simple, 3 items.
What's the first data item.
5 10 15.
What I expect now is 3 rows: one
with 5 dashes, one with 10 dashes
and one with fifteen dashes.
Awesome.
That's what we've got.
Displaying histogram 1 2 3 4 5
dashes, 10 dashes, 15 dashes.
You see that, that was pretty simple,
and it's pretty powerful too because
we've got dynamic data structure
that's growing as we need it.
Let's run this one more time
with a little bit more data.
Let's say I have 10 data items and
I've got a 10 34 and I'm just going
to put some really any numbers in
here 7, I don't want to do a 90,
let's do a 30, let's do a 50 and let's
do a 1 and a 2 down at the bottom.
Okay, so there we go.
There's my histogram.
You can see the last two should be 1
And 2 and they are right here 1 and 2.
And you could count them if you like.
But I think they're correct.
Obviously, you would want to count
them if you were going to test them
to be sure that everything is correct.
So there's my histogram,
pretty straightforward.
This is kind of hard to see
though I mean how many dashes
are here, I can't really tell.
So why don't we say that every fifth
dash, let's display an asterisk
instead that'll make it easier to see.
Okay, so how do we do that.
We're right in here, so what could do
is we could modify this code slightly.
We could say if that specific I
my counting variable, right, mod
5 is equal to 0, so if that means
I'm on a fifth number, right.
In this case, I want
to display an asterisk.
Otherwise, so I need an else here.
I just want to display the dash.
And let me indent this correctly.
There we go.
So notice the indentation here.
It's really important.
If you look at that piece of code
right there, you can see that
I have a for loop and I've got
another for loop nested within it.
And that for loop has
an if else statement.
So every time that loop executes,
I'm executing that if else statement.
Okay, so you can see the structure of
the code by just looking at the code.
You don't have to
try to figure it out.
If everything here was indented
to the left flush here, it'd be
really hard to see the structure.
So let's run this and see -- okay,
let's say I've got 10 data items and
I've got 34 32 24 5 10 and just some
other numbers that I can put in and
let's do 2 and 1 again at the end.
There we go.
So now you can see that
every fifth number is being
displayed with an asterisk.
So in this case it's really
easy I can tell that's 10.
I can tell that's 19.
I can tell that's 5 10
15 20 25 34 and so forth.
So it makes it much easier
to interpret the data.
Here's a really easy simple
example of using a nested loop.
In this case, the 4 4 makes
sense because we know how far
we're going but we could easily
rewrite this with whiles or
do whiles or anything we like.
Remember, at the end of the day,
a loop is a loop is a loop, right.
So they all do the same thing.
They all iterate.
It's just a matter of trying to choose
the right one for the application.
So hope that helps.
These kinds of examples are
going to be really useful in the
challenge exercise which is next.